---
lastmod: "2025-11-10T17:25:00.0000000+00:00"
author: patrick
categories:
- programming
date: "2025-11-10T17:25:00.0000000+00:00"
title: "Robocop: automated code review"
summary: "I wrote a basic LLM-based code review tool that's distressingly effective."
---

I recently wrote [Robocop](https://github.com/Smaug123/robocop), and then used Claude Sonnet 4.5 to turn it into a GitHub app under supervision from GPT-5 and Gemini 2.5 Pro.

## What it does

Robocop feeds diffs, plus surrounding context, into GPT-5 at max reasoning, for automated code review.
(That's basically it! It's very simple.)

In more detail: it watches every commit I make to a pull request in a repo I own, submits the content of the pull request to GPT-5, and eventually comments on the PR with feedback.

It has been absurdly effective for me.
Its feedback has something like a 90% hit rate of true positives vs false positives.
Sometimes it finds really insidious or subtle logic bugs, and I've basically stopped caring about basic LeetCode-style algorithmic correctness when reading Robocop-approved PRs because it finds those bugs so well.
Other times it finds places where documentation has drifted or some global consistency no longer holds.

## What it doesn't do

* It doesn't work for anyone else. For security reasons, I have it responding only to my commits. (Fork it, of course, if you want to use it.)
* I don't trust it to perform architectural reviews, and it doesn't really try to identify when a PR has created a solution to a problem that only exists because the architecture is bad.

## How it works

It has several components:

* A dashboard, which you run entirely locally, which scrapes your submissions to the OpenAI API and displays the ones which have Robocop metadata associated with them.
* A standalone Rust binary, which you can invoke locally on a code checkout to get an ad-hoc review.
* A GitHub app, which responds automatically to all my PRs.

## Why write it

Other tools exist to do the same thing; GitHub Copilot has some of these features.
But I had some bad experiences with automated PR review tooling in the earlier days, and GPT-5 is the first model that seems to be actually competent at the kinds of reviews I ask of it.
At least with Robocop, I know that any problems are my own fault!
